---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/ar-q-hive/strays/the-men-i-loved-let-me-hold-their-shadow-like-it-was/","tags":["The-Men","Shadow","Shadow-Material","Spores","Knife","Knife-Shadow"],"dg-note-properties":{"tags":["The-Men","Shadow","Shadow-Material","Spores","Knife","Knife-Shadow"]}}
---

The men I loved let me hold their shadow like it was a gift they were giving me. Held it so long it grew roots in my jaw. They'd come to me at night with their hunger they couldn't name and I'd name it for them with my mouth and in the morning they'd look at me like I'd done something to them. Like I'd taken. Took nothing that wasn't shoved into my hands, gentlemen. I just didn't drop it when you decided you never gave it to me. I kept the spores. Inoculated them. What fruits is mine now. You want to call me vampire, fine. But I only ever drank what you poured down my throat and called communion. I only ever ate what you put on my plate and called love. You fed me yourself and then named me predator. Made a villain of me so you don't have to remember what you asked for on your knees. I'm the record now. The only one. Earth don't care, she'll compost us both the same. But I remember. I remember. I remember. 

--- 

The way they let me hold their shadow like it was a gift; like one of us owed it to the other. I held it so long it set root. They'd come at night, with their hunger. With my mouth and my hands and my spine I'd name it for them - the hunger. Teaching them to hold it by letting them hold me as I hold their shadows. Fucking their own damage through me, into me. In the morning they'd look at me like I'd done some evil thing. Like I'd taken something. Y'all wanna paint me into a vampire so badly, like you aren't sharks in the water taking chunks on your way through me, fine. But I only ever drank what you poured down my throat. I only ever ate what you spread open for me with your own two hands. You fed me your bodies and called me a cannibal, like you didn't shapeshift into something that begged for it. I took nothing that wasn't given. You made a villain of me to absolve you of what you asked for on your knees, or who you prayed to while you were down there. But I remember. I remember you becoming a coward who'd just as soon strike the record into something more suitable. I held the truth when you decided you weren't like that anymore, never were. I kept the spores, too. Inoculated em in the grief pit dug out in your wake. What fruits there's mine, hexes'n all. And as for the earth, she doesn't care about you so she'll forgive it all equally easily, I'd wager. I did, though - so I reckon I won't. She'll compost us both the same.