---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/ar-q-hive/mars/p-g/people-like-you/","tags":["#poem","#writing","#Original-Content","#dgpubs"],"dg-note-properties":{"tags":["#poem","#writing","#Original-Content","#dgpubs"]}}
---

a strange sort of wanting, built on the backs of great beasts buried deep amidst the earth of me. people like you - all storm, all song, all mud-spattered with morals and draped unwilling in those tough-guy don’t-cry cultural influences y’all were born under - same as moon, same as star - bucking raw on the backs of cowboys past and growing past the stubborn sickness of their anachronism. taming that roughened and near-ancient hide into that which fits who you’d like to become, instead. into something with brighter color, stronger stitching, that sits much softer against the skin - people like you awake those beasts in me; massive and pressed unforgettable up against my internal night sky, outlined in bright moon. they’re shaking loose the raw clots of old pain and those tumble way down to join themselves with the ground and then clatter there. they’re clutching in huge and crude hands built for holding that which I know not the size of: my wanting. my masochism. the depth of my certainty, when called to action by you. or, rather, people like you. those great beasts roam the landscape of me - lumbering aimless and leaving deep rumbles in their wake, dripping old hurts and singing strange and wanting sorts of songs, about you. or, rather, the kind of person that people like you somehow managed to become.