---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/ar-q-hive/online-pubs/bright-seattle-moments/","title":"bright seattle moments","tags":["#writing","#Original-Content","#Seattle"],"dg-note-properties":{"title":"bright seattle moments","tags":["#writing","#Original-Content","#Seattle"]}}
---


I stashed my pack in a really nice park somewhere. I staggered out of the bushes and scared a family of white people getting their photos taken in the sunshine. They decided to take some pictures by the water, 100 feet away from me. After chuckling to myself, I mosey’d around, looking at all of the ritzy houses and zigzagged around the neighborhood trying to avoid climbing the steep hills that seemed to be everywhere. Lucifer caught sight of a crow and scrambled out of my jacket to climb onto my head. I kept walking while he balanced up there, chirping and clicking. This was fine, and cute as hell, until I took a look behind me and noticed that one raven had become many; at least ten, probably more. They were following us. Every block I covered, they’d flock to the nearest tree. I doubled back, to make sure I wasn’t just being paranoid. They were definitely following us. I had zero desire to be harassed by a murder of crows, so I snatched Louie from my head and sprinted as fast as I could to the main road, where there were no trees. Louie seemed upset with me.

---

I woke up with ice coating my sleeping bag, but no one had bothered me about sleeping next to a fence that said “no trespassing” on it, so I was grateful. I’d lost one of my gloves, so I wore a sock with a hole in the pinky toe on my left hand while I tried to quickly pack up. The residential neighborhood I’d ended up thumbing near seemed a lot more unwelcoming in the light of day, to a vagrant like me. My piss rose a cloud of steam that drifted across the street slowly. Lucifer terrorized some early risen roly-polies. I ate a peanut butter and jelly bagel and two bananas, wondering calmly how I could make more money in order to justify eating more before lunch. After three or four or fifteen cars turned a blind eye to my “Kitten on board!” sign, an elderly woman pulled over and gave me three granola bars and a hat, saying, “You take care of that little guy.” Lucifer was trying to catch falling leaves behind me. The light fell thick and golden for most of the morning, as if I could catch it in a jar.

---

On the way out to Seatac, Kat and I decided that coffee was in order. She told me about a phenomenon by the name of “white coffee”. Premature espresso beans, roasted and prepared like one would prepare normal espresso, but with half the jitter and a robust nutty flavor. I was intrigued. We drove slowly around the compact streets of an area littered with college students, listening to Seven Lions. Kat pointed out her favorite songs and told me stories associated with them. The cafe we settled on smacked of a coming-of-age punk sitcom, circa 2001. Peeling stickers and old graffiti tags covered the walls and tables. Pay-to-play game systems and old internet connected computers topped off the vibe. Seemed like the kind of place you’d spend most of your time in if you couldn’t afford wifi, or if you were working on an anarcho-primitivist zine. I ordered a white coffee with some zany name that someone probably said deadpan every morning on their way to work. I took a stamp card even though I knew I would lose it before I’d get a chance to come back. I haven’t seen white coffee advertised anywhere since, which is unfortunate because it was fucking delicious.
