---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/ar-q-hive/online-pubs/i-took-a-bunch-of-cocaine-to-a-work-holiday-party/","title":"I took a bunch of cocaine to a work holiday party","tags":["writing"],"dg-note-properties":{"title":"I took a bunch of cocaine to a work holiday party","tags":["writing"]}}
---


I was asked by a few select coworkers to provide this service, so I pulled some strings and locked in a clean half oz. in the spirit of christmas, as one does. It was selling fast, so I spent a lot of time doing deals in the bathroom of this fancy venue that the restaurant (I was working as a line cook for a whiskey bar and grill) had rented out for us. It was a fun time! I ended up in the bathroom with my Sous chef more often than not because he kept wanting to do bumps, and who am I to turn down the whim of my chef? I told him that if anybody had anything to say, he should just tell them we were making out. He got great joy out of this, and followed my advice. Two or three people from that night still to this day think we were suckin each other off that whole time lmao

So the third or fourth time we saunter out of the bathroom together, giggling or horsing around, it was brought to my attention that someone was taking note of our frequent bathroom trips. Turns out this someone was the new owner, that I'd never met, who had recently taken over in the place of some other dude that I never got to meet but allegedly owned the restaurant. I got someone to point him out, and I had definitely locked eyes with him on the way out of the bathroom a couple of times before knowing who he was supposed to be.

Now mind you, this holiday party fell on a long weekend, that I had absolutely spent getting very drunk and very high pretty much the whole time beforehand. (Winter is a rough time for me and that's how I learned to cope.) So I was more or less blacked out before I even got to the party. I think there were also something like 40 etizolam (black market xanax lol) in my pocket, so I was popping those like candy and handing them out to whoever wanted them as well lol. Needless to say the party was lit.

Anyway, I get word of this dude noticing that a bunch of us, me especially, were being shady in the bathrooms. According to the eye witnesses, I declared that "I don't even know who the fuck that is," and "he can fuckin fight me if he's got problems." Doesn't sound like me, but also I'm not surprised. (Flashback to being fucked up on the strip in vegas and nearly instigating a fight with FIVE security guards, all at once, two different times. The behavior tracks.)

The rest of the night is a blur, but someone broke out some acid and distributed hits to the group. Apparently we hopped to three or more bars around town (zero recollection of this) and ended up back at a coworkers house where I then had to deal with a girl who had been accidentally overdosed with the cid. She couldn't remember her name, or why she was there with us, but was also being very aggressive and confrontational about it. Kept demanding Poweraid. "JUST GET ME MY FUCKING POWERAID AND EVERYTHING WILL BE FINE." We sent someone to get poweraid bc why the fuck not right? Lol we give it to her, and surprise! Everything was not fine. Luckily I'm super experienced with people having bad trips, so I took the leader position in the situation and successfully kept everyone as calm and happy as could be expected, despite being on the fourth day of a manic winter bender. Eventually we had to uber her home because she was nOT being cooperative. Afterwards, the remainder of the group gave me kudos for handling the situation so well, which is when I confessed that I was probably more fucked up than any of them. They barely believed me until I curled into a ball in the middle of the kitchen and cried a little lol. Everything was peachy after that. The end!

The best and most impressive part about this is that I managed to push a grand+ of gear while fading in and out of blackouts in one night, and I didn't lose track of any of the money OR have to deal with a single IOU. Highkey proud of myself for that, because it 100% could have gone the complete other direction lmao

In summation: I'm moldavite, your friendly neighborhood Degenerate. Thanks for reading, and goodnight

Oh! I also (allegedly) approached one of the servers I worked with who I thought was very attractive at one of the bars we hopped. Apparently I immediately opened the conversation with, "You look like you work out. Do you wanna fuck," which he very politely declined from what I can remember, and then the conversation promptly moved into us sharing about our intense depression and suicidal ideation, ffs :facepalm:

I recall nothing from that convo but apparently I was sincere enough for that guy to text me a few times after, checking on me and letting me know that he wanted to help if he could and I could always hit him up to talk. I was so confused by the texts that I just didn't reply for a few days until I saw him in person and admitted that I couldnt remember anything about what we'd talked about.

He laughed and recapped it for me, being especially gracious about my clumsy flirting attempt, saying "it's nice to get compliments, doesn't matter who they're from."

He's a good dude but I found out later that he doesn't eat pussy???? Or even try to get the girls he hooks up with off???????? which, unfortunately, makes him wack
